---
layout:     post
title:      "Announcing Jactl 2.0.0"
date:       2024-01-11T08:33:07+11:00
categories: blog
image:      /assets/logo-picture.jpg
author:     "James Crawford"
---

[Jactl](https://jactl.io) 2.0.0 is a major release that fixes a few bugs and adds some new language features.
The biggest new feature is powerful pattern matching with destructuring via a new switch expression.

## Enhancements

### Pattern Matching with Destructuring ([#46](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/46))

Jactl now offers a `switch` expression similar to Java but with more powerful pattern matching with destructuring.
Unlike Java, there is no `case` keyword used so a simple `switch` expression would look like this:
```groovy
switch (x) {
  1,3,5,7,9  -> println 'odd'
  2,4,6,8,10 -> println 'even'
  default    -> println 'unknown'
}
```

Since `switch` is actually an expression and returns a value, you could also write it like this:
```groovy
println switch (x) {
  1,3,5,7,9  -> 'odd'
  2,4,6,8,10 -> 'even'
  default    -> 'unknown'
}

```

As well as matching simple literal values such as numbers and Strings you can match on a type pattern:
```groovy
switch (x) {
  String         -> 'string'
  int,long       -> 'whole number'
  double,Decimal -> 'decimal number' 
}
```

Any type of pattern can be followed by an `if` clause to specify additional conditions that must be met for the
match.
The `it` variable is bound to the value being switched on and can be referred to within the `if` and within the
result:
```groovy
switch (str.substring(3)) {
  /content=/r if it.size() < 20 -> 'short content' 
  /name="(.*)".*type="(.*)"/r   -> "name is $1,type is $2"   // Regex match with capture variables
}
```

List and Map patterns can also be matched against and `_` can be used to match any value and `*` can be used to
match any number of values:
```groovy
switch (x) {
  [1,2,3]           -> 'matched'
  [int,String,long] -> 'matched'     // List with an int, a String, and a long
  [_,_]             -> 'matched'     // List of size 2
  [1,*,4]           -> 'matched'     // List where 1st element is 1 and last is 4 (size is at least 2)
  [name:_,*]        -> 'matched'     // Map that has an entry of 'name' of any value
}
```

Destructuring is supported where a binding variable can be supplied that will bind to that part of the structure
if the overall pattern matches:
```groovy
switch (x) {
  [a,b,c] -> a+b+c // Match 3 element list and return sum of the elements
}
```

Binding variables can occur multiple times and for the pattern to match the values of the binding variable must be
the same at all locations.
They can also be specified with a type to match on a specific type at that location:
```groovy
switch (x) {
  [a,_,a]       -> 'matched'   // First and last elements must be the same
  [_,[int a,a]] -> 'matched'   // Second element is a pair of ints of same value
}
```

See blog post on [Pattern Matching and Destructuring](https://jactl.io/blog/2023/12/21/switch-expressions.html) for
more details and examples.

### Support for Named Constants ([#51](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/51))

A new keyword `const` allows you to create named constants:
```groovy
const Decimal PI = 3.1415926536

def area = PI * radius.sqr()
```

The type is optional and will be inferred from the type of constant expression of the initialiser:
```groovy
const PI     = 3.1415926536
const RADIUS = 100
const AREA   = PI * RADIUS * RADIUS 
```

### Import Static

`import` statements can now selectively import static methods and constants from other classes into the current
script/class:
```groovy
import static utils.Math.PI
import static utils.Math.circleArea

def area = circleArea(100)
def circumference = 2 * PI * 100
```

`as` can be used to give another name to the item being imported:
```groovy
import static utils.Math.circleArea as area

def x = area(100)
```

The use of `*` to import all static functions and constants from a class is also supported:
```groovy
import static utils.Math.*
```

### `do/until` Loops ([#54](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/54))

Jactl does not support `do/while` loops (see [FAQ](https://jactl.io/faq#why-is-there-no-dowhile-loop)) but now has
support for `do/until` loops that loop _until_ a condition is met:
```groovy
int countTokens = 0;
do {
  countTokens++
} until (nextToken().isEof())
```

### New `groupBy()` Method for Lists ([#55](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/55))

Jactl has added a `groupBy()` method for lists that, given a closure that returns the key
for a given list element, will group elements with the same key and return a Map of lists
where the lists contain all elements with the same key.
For example, to group words of the same length together:
```groovy
['list', 'of', 'words', 'with', 'different', 'sizes'].groupBy{ it.size().toString() }
```
Result will be:
```groovy
['4':['list', 'with'], '2':['of'], '5':['words', 'sizes'], '9':['different']]
```

### New `transpose()` Method for Lists ([#56](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/56))

`transpose()` works as a matrix transpose where rows are transposed into columns (and columns
into rows).
It operates on a list of lists:
```groovy
[ ['a',1], ['b',2], ['c',3] ].transpose()
```
Result is:
```groovy
[['a', 'b', 'c'], [1, 2, 3]]
```

If the input lists are not all the same size, `null` will be used to fill any missing values.

## Breaking Changes

### New Keywords

Jactl has introduced these new keywords in version 2.0.0:
* `const`
* `until`
* `switch`
* `default`

### `do` Blocks Return Value of Last Expression/Statement ([#53](https://github.com/jaccomoc/jactl/issues/53))

To make the language more consistent, `do` blocks now work like functions/closures and return the
value of the last expression/statement rather than always returning `true`.

### Byte Values Are Always Positive

Previously there were inconsitencies with how byte values were treated.
Sometimes negative byte values were allowed, and sometimes they were automatically converted
to the equivalent postive value.

To make the language more consistent, byte values are always treated as positive values between
`0` and `255`.

If a negative value is supplied it will be automatically converted into the appropriate postive
value.
For example, `(byte)-1` will be converted to `255`.

### Use of `++` and `--` on Constant Values is Now Invalid

Previously, expressions such as `++1` was allowed (and would return `2` in this case).
Now, this will cause a compile-time error.

This change was needed as part of the support for named constants to make sure that code
does not try to modify a constant.
